---
CoIP: 2
Title: Contract Types, Values, and Calls
Authors:
  - Jonathan Sobel (jonathan-sobel)
Status: Draft
Category: Language
Created: 2026-05-27
Requires: none
Replaces: none
---

<!--
 This file is part of Compact.
 Copyright (C) 2026 Minokawa project contributors
 SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
 Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
 you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
 You may obtain a copy of the License at

     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

 Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
 distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
 WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
 See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
 limitations under the License. 
-->

## Abstract

<!--
The abstract is a short (about 200 word) description of the issue being
addressed and the proposed solution.
-->

In order to support the creation of multiple smart contracts that work
together as a system, along with decentralized applications that use
them, three major new features are added to Compact:
1. contract types
2. references to contracts as values
3. calls within a circuit to another contract's circuits

This set of changes is intended as the first in a sequence of
improvements that lead towards rich support for multi-contract
systems.  Later proposals will address dynamic discovery of contract
implementation code and management of private state across contracts.

## Motivation

<!--
Clearly explain the problem and why the existing Compact language and tooling is
inadequate to address the problem.
-->

Smart contracts are an integral part of the Midnight blockchain.
Midnight provides the Compact language for defining contracts, and it
uses zero-knowledge proofs to enable parts of a contract's execution
to remain undisclosed.

Prior to the improvements described in this proposal, it was already
possible to write smart contracts for Midnight in Compact and to
create one or more decentralized applications (DApps) for any
contract.  It was not possible, however, to create *multiple contracts
that work together as a system*, with contracts holding references to
other contracts in their ledger state and with circuits in one
contract calling the circuits of other contracts.

This proposal describes new functionality to be added to Compact,
enabling such multi-contract systems.  The main new features are:

1. contract types: Compact programs can specify a collection of
   circuit signatures (that is, their names, parameter types, and
   return types) to describe other contracts on which they depend,
2. contracts as values: variables and ledger fields can hold
   references to other contracts, and
3. cross-contract calls: circuits in one contract can invoke the
   circuits of another contract.

These features work together.  The contract variables and ledger
fields are described by contract types, and the cross-contract calls
are to circuits named in those type declarations.

One may imagine a future version of Compact having quite rich support
for multi-contract systems, with dynamic discovery of the actual
circuit code that implements a contract type and with support for witness
functions and private state in called circuits.  This proposal
describes only the first step in that direction.

Specifically, three major limitations are incorporated into this first
proposal for multi-contract system support:

1. When a contract holds a reference to another contract of
   type `T` and calls one of its circuits, the implementation of the
   circuit is found by assuming that it was produced by compiling
   `T.compact` and that it is available in the same application
   context as the caller.  (This limitation is described more
   precisely in the following section.)
2. The behavior of recursive cross-contract calls is undefined.
3. Circuits called from other contracts must not rely on witness
   functions.  That is, cross-contract calls can be made only to
   circuits that do not call witness functions.  Any private data
   required by a called circuit must therefore be passed to the
   circuit in its arguments by the caller.

It is hoped that a future Compact improvement proposal might lift
these restrictions by introducing a means for discovering circuit code
dynamically and some system for multi-contract private state
management.  Even this first stage of delivery, though, will enable
the creation of useful multi-contract systems.

## Specification

<!--
Describe the proposed solution in sufficient technical detail that it could be
implemented.  The intended behavior should be clearly described and unambiguous.
-->

Each of the three major new features is described in turn.

### Contract Types

A new form is added to Compact's program elements: the contract type
declaration.  Like the `enum` and `struct` declarations, a `contract`
declaration introduces a new program-defined type.  Here is an
example.

```compact
contract Adder {
  circuit setAddAmount(n: Uint<64>): [];
  circuit addTo(n: Uint<64>): Uint<64>;
}
```

The Compact grammar already includes a production for "external
contract declaration."  This proposal does not change that production.
Note that the _circuit-declaration_ in the grammar is defined to
require a "simple" parameter list, because the circuits in contract
type declarations are not allowed to have generic parameters.

When some subset of a contract's circuits matches the set of those
declared in a contract type, the contract is said to **satisfy** (or
**have**) that type.

<!-- FIX PURE -->
More precisely, define the **signature** of a circuit to be the types
of its parameters, plus its return type, as well as whether it is
declared to be `pure`.  Changing the parameter names or using
destructuring patterns in a circuit definition does not change its
signature, because the signature is defined only by the parameter and
return *types*.

The circuit declarations in a contract type declaration also have
signatures defined by their types and whether they are declared to be
pure.  For example, the signature of `addTo` in the `Adder` interface
above is

> `Uint<64>` &rarr; `Uint<64>`

<!--
One circuit signature *S* is a **subtype** of another *T* when
1. *S* and *T* are either (1) both declared `pure` or (2) neither declared `pure`.
2. *S* and *T* have the same number of parameter types.
3. The return type of *S* is a subtype of the return type of *T*.
4. The type of each parameter of *T* is a subtype of the corresponding
   parameter of *S*.  That is, for signature *S* to be a subtype of
   signature *T*, *S*'s parameter types must be supertypes of *T*'s.

(Formally, circuit signature subtyping is contravariant on parameter
types and covariant on return types.)
-->

A contract **satisfies** an contract type when, for every circuit
declared in the `contract` form, the contract exports a circuit with
the same name and with a signature whose types are identical to the
one in the declaration.  Furthermore, every circuit declared `pure` in
the contract type declaration must also be declared `pure` (explicitly)
in the satisfying contract implementation.  If the circuit in the
contract type declaration is *not* declared `pure`, the type can be
satisfied by any circuit with the same name and a matching signature,
regardless of whether the implementation is declared `pure`.

For example, any contract that exports `setAddAmount` and `addTo`
circuits with signatures identical to those in the `Adder` declaration
above satisfies the `Adder` contract type.  A contract whose
definition of `addTo` is declared to be `pure` would also satisfy the
`Adder` type.

<!--
A contract that exports circuits like these

```compact
export circuit setAddAmount(n: Uint<128>): [] {
  ...
}

export circuit addTo(n: Uint<128>): Uint<32> {
  ...
}
```

also implements the `Adder` interface.
-->

This is true regardless of whether the contract declares any intention
to satisfy the type.  In other words, contract typing is structural,
not nominal.

On the other hand, when a contract type used to describe the required
interface for a set of contracts, and a contract is intended to
implement that interface, it is useful to assert that intention.  This
is accomplished with a new program element to assert that the current
contract has a specific type.  Here is an example.

```
contract implements Adder;
```

The contract type name must be in scope, using Compact's existing
rules for the scope of program-defined types.  The `implements`
declaration applies to the contract being defined at the point where
it appears.  A contract may be declared to satisfy several different
contract types by including multiple `contract implements` declarations.

The addition of the `contract implements` form requires a new
program-element production in the Compact grammar:

> _implements-assertion_ &rarr; `contract implements` _contract-name_ `;`

To reiterate what was previously stated, a contract satisfies a
contract type by exporting definitions with matching types and purity
declarations for all the type's declared circuits, no matter whether a
`contract implements` declaration appears in the code.  If such a
declaration _is_ present, though, then the compiler will verify it and
reject the program with a compile-time error if the contract fails to
export the circuits required by the contract type.  The contract can
export additional circuits, as needed, as long as some subset of the
exported circuits satifies the requirements of the contract type.

### Contracts as Values

A `contract` declaration introduces a new contract type into its
scope.  A contract type is a regular program-defined Compact type,
just like a structure type or enumeration type.  For example, it can
be used as the type of a circuit parameter or witness function
parameter, the type of a structure element, or the specializing
argument of a ledger-state type such as `List` or `Map`.  Here is an
example of a ledger declaration using the `Adder` type and a
constructor that initializes it.

```compact
export ledger adders: List<Adder>;

constructor(a: Adder) {
  adders.pushFront(disclose(a));
}
```

A contract type represents the set of deployed contracts that satisfy
the corresponding contract declaration.  This induces a subtype
relationship on contract types.  If the circuits declared in contract
type `B` are a superset of those declared in contract type `A`, then
`B` is a subtype of `A`.  A contract type can therefore be a subtype
of many disjoint supertypes.  The least upper bound of a pair of
contract types is the intersection of their declared circuits, which
may be empty.  (The empty contract type is useless, but valid.)  Also,
any pair of contract types has a greatest lower bound: the union of
their declared circuits.

Another way to define what it means for a contract to satisfy or
implement a contract type is to recognize that the entire set of
circuits exported by a Compact program forms a "natural" contract
type.  In other words, every Compact program induces a contract type
that could be written as a `contract` declaration.  If that "natural"
contract type is a subtype of some other contract type `A`, then the
contract implementation satisfies `A`.

No mechanism is provided by this proposal to *create* values with
contract types.  Instead, the surrounding context (that is, the
application code) introduces a contract value into the Compact program
by calling a circuit or constructor with the address of a deployed
contract or by returning the address of a deployed contract from a
witness function.

Because the underlying representation of a contract reference is a
contract address, whose value comes from outside the safe realm of
Compact's type system, dynamic checks are necessary to guarantee that
the denoted value truly implements a contract type's set of declared
circuits.  This proposal does not specify exactly where these dynamic
checks must occur; it only requires that type safety be preserved by
the system.

No new grammar productions are necessary to support contract types and
references to contract values, because they occupy the same
grammatical classes other program-defined types and references to
their values.

### Cross-Contract Calls

The main use for holding a reference to a value that satisfies a
`contract` type declaration is to call the circuits named in that
declaration.  Here is an example of a circuit calling one of the
`Adder` type's circuits.

```compact
export circuit setUpDoubleAdd(a: Adder, n: Uint<64>): [] {
  a.setAddAmount(n + n);
}
```

Semantically, a call to another contract's circuit is in the same
category as a call to one of the contract's own circuits.  In the
Compact grammar, however, a cross-contract call is parsed more like a
ledger state operation: the contract reference, followed by a dot
(i.e., a period or full stop), followed by the name of a circuit
declared in contract reference's type, followed by the arguments to
the circuit call.

When the called circuit is not declared to be `pure` in the contract
type, the call's arguments must be explicitly disclosed (using the
`disclose` form) somewhere along the path to the call, because the
called circuit might make its arguments publicly visible.

### Limitations

Implementing these improvements, without additional constraints,
would require solutions to several hard problems, such as dynamic
discovery of the circuit code for other contracts.  To make it
possible for this proposal to be implemented prior to such solutions
being available, the following additional limitations are imposed.

1. In order to satisfy a contract type `T`, a contract must be
   defined in the file `T.compact`, and its compilation artifacts must
   be present alongside those of any callers of `T`'s circuits.  More
   precisely, if the Compact implementation defines a search path for
   finding compiler outputs in the code it generates, then the outputs
   of compiling `T.compact` must be able to be found on that search
   path when executing any circuits that make cross-contract calls
   using references of type `T`.  This effectively limits any DApp to
   a single implementation of each contract type.
2. If any cycles are present in the call graph of cross-contract
   calls, the behavior is undefined.  This implies that contracts
   cannot implement either direct or indirect recursion using calls
   through references to contract values.  This is a restriction on
   the *implementation* of contracts.  For example, suppose a circuit
   in `S.compact` makes a cross-contract call to a circuit defined in
   a contract type `T`.  If the application uses an implementation of
   `T` in which the called circuit itself makes another call to a
   circuit defined in a contract type `S`, the compiler may reject the
   program, or the call may fail at execution time in the deployed
   application.
3. Any circuit that calls witness functions is excluded from
   consideration for satisfying a contract type.  The called contract
   may define witness functions, but those functions cannot be called
   directly or indirectly by the exported circuits that satisfy a
   contract type.  This implies that every cross-contract call is to a
   circuit whose only access to private state is through its
   arguments, and its only means of affecting private state is through
   the values it returns.

Taken together, these limit Compact's current multi-contract systems
to those in which a "root" contract may declare witnesses and hold
private state, but the circuits it calls in other contracts (and the
circuits they call in still other contracts, and so on) may not call
witness functions.  All private state manipulated by the system of
contracts originates at the root.  Furthermore, the concrete
implementations of all contracts in the system are non-recursive and
known to any DApp operating over the system.

Many interesting decentralized systems can be created under the
preceding constraints.  For example, a contract may define witness
functions to manipulate private state, and some of its circuits may
rely on those witnesses, while others do not.  The full set of circuits
can be used in an application that interacts with the contract
directly, while the subset of circuits that do not call witnesses can
be used to satisfy a contract type as part of another system of
contracts.

## Rationale

<!--
Explain the design decisions that were made and the reasons behind them.
-->

The design of the proposed contract declaration and call syntax is
driven by a desire to remain consistent with the style of existing
syntax.  Aspects of the rationale for the semantics and current
limitations are discussed in the Motivation, Specification, and
Rejected Ideas sections.

Overall, the goal has been to provide extensions to Compact that are
natural and consistent to programmers, while meeting the needs of
major multi-contract use cases.  This goal has been balanced against a
desire for this initial support for cross-contract calls to be
relatively easy to implement.

This proposal omits support for cross-contract calls to circuits that
rely on witness functions, because Compact needs a coherent design for
multi-contract systems with private state.  While awaiting such a
design, it is possible to improve Compact by providing contract types
and cross-contract calls whose syntax and semantics will be
forwards-compatible with later development.

## Backwards Compatibility

<!--
Describe how the proposed solution affects existing systems, applications, and
users.  Is it a breaking change?
-->

This proposal introduces new uses for the keywords `contract` and
`implements`.  Both of these were already reserved keywords in Compact.
The production for `contract` was already present in the Compact
grammar, but it was not previously specified to have any meaning.

Thus, this is not a breaking change.  No working Compact programs
which relied solely on the specified semantics should stop working or
have different behavior because of the changes proposed here.
(Modifications would be required for any programs relying directly on
the unspecified JavaScript code previously generated by the Compact
compiler for the `contract` form.)

## Security Implications

<!--
Analyze the potential security implications of the proposed change.  Are there
any new attack vectors or vulnerabilities introduced?  How will they be
mitigated.
-->

The major security implications of this proposal are related to its
limitations.  The Compact compiler produces JavaScript code for each
circuit in a contract, and when a TypeScript or JavaScript application
is written to use the contract, it "calls a circuit" by running the
generated JavaScript code.  The execution of the generated code yields
transcripts about which ZK proofs can be generated, enabling the
circuit's execution to be posted to the blockchain.

An end user of such an application must trust the application code
enough to let it run in the user's web browser or local JavaScript
environment.  There is no inherent guarantee, though, that the
JavaScript circuit code provided by the application is exactly what
was produced by the Compact compiler.  It could be modified in a
harmful way.  (The way the code updates the blockchain's ledger state
cannot be changed, because the proofs about such updates rely on
cryptographic evidence already associated with the circuit as part of
the contract's deployment.)

The risks of this execution model are not changed by this proposal,
but they are amplified, in the following sense.  When an application
provides code for contract `C`, which calls a circuit of contract
type `T`, the application must also provide code for a contract
that satisfies `T`.  The generated code for `C` assumes that the
contract satisfying `T` was produced by compiling `T.compact`.
Because the code is all executed in the same context (for example, the
same web browser page/session), the code that the application delivers
for `T` has access to all the private state associated with `C`.

The current proposal mitigates the risk of private state leakage
across contracts by disallowing cross-contract calls to circuits that
call witness functions.  A called circuit, *as expressed in Compact*,
thus has no means of interrogating private state.  The code that an
application actually delivers to implement the contract, however, can
see all of the private state.

In other words, until some later Compact Improvement Proposal
introduces a way to limit the sharing of private state to specific
contracts, the scope of trust for the private state associated with a
contract is a whole application using that contract.  This proposal
provides no notion of limited access to private state.

## How to Teach This

<!--
Explain how to teach users, including both new and experienced ones, how to use
the CoIP in their own work.
-->

The approach to enabling the creation of multi-contract systems that
is described in this proposal should be fairly intuitive and easily
explained with a few examples.  Treating contract types as another
kind of program-defined type, like structure types and enumeration
types, means that programmers can rely on many of the intuitions they
have developed about those existing program-defined types.

## Implementation

<!--
Discuss how the proposed change could be implemented.  What parts of the Compact
toolchain or the blockchain environment will need to be modified?  What are the
dependencies, if any?

Provide a link to a reference implementation, if there is one, and describe any
limitations.
-->

The required changes to the Compact grammar have already been
described in the Specification section.  Any implementation must also
extend its type-checking system to handle the new contract types and
their subtype relationships.

The implementation of a cross-contract call can generate JavaScript
code that imports all the needed callee definitions from files with
names derived from the name of the callee's interface.  At a minimum,
an implementation can assume that the compiler outputs for the callee
interface are in the same location as those of the caller.  A more
sophisticated implementation might support some kind of search path
for such imports.

<!-- Do we need a note about placement of dynamic checks? -->

## Rejected Ideas

<!--
Describe other ideas that were considered and explain why they were ultimately
not adopted.
-->

Prior to this proposal, several alternate possibilities were
considered for extending Compact to support multi-contract systems.

### Multiple Contracts in the Same File

Some initial ideas focused on *static* composition of multi-contract
systems, where all the code for the multiple contracts is compiled
together.  To support this multi-contract coding style, it was
proposed that a `contract` form be added to the language, creating a
scope in place of the top level for contract elements, such as circuit
definitions and witness function declarations.  It would look much
like a class definition in object-oriented languages.

For example, within a Compact file, there might be a contract
definition like this:

```compact
contract C {
  export circuit myCircuit(Uint<32> x): Uint<32> {
    return x;
  }
}
```

Using the `include` form, this would support the creation of libraries
of contracts.  Furthermore, the intent to implement an interface could
be incorporated directly into the `contract` form.

It may still be useful to take Compact in this direction, but it would
be a large change, and it would not address the real need for more
dynamic composition of contracts, so it was set aside for now.

### Concrete Contract Types

The current proposal introduced contract types that are entirely
derived from contract type declarations.  Once again drawing
inspiration from object-oriented languages, Compact could have not
only these "pure" types, but also *concrete contract types*.  For
example, defining a contract in `C.compact` could implicitly create a
contract type `C`.  Other contracts might use the type `C` as a
program-defined type, able to refer to values that represented
deployments of `C` (that is, exactly `C`, not "some contract with the
circuits of `C`).

An extreme step in this direction would be to abandon separate
contract type declarations altogether, allowing contract inheritance
and abstract contract definitions, in which some or all of the
circuits are declared, but not defined.  With this extension, the
aforementioned contract type `C` would represent deployments of `C`
(assuming `C` was fully defined, with definitions for every circuit),
as well as all contract types inheriting from `C`.

A major problem with this direction is that contracts do not have
explicit names in the current language.  The "name" of a contract is
implicit in the name of the file defining it.  Any design relying on
contract names would probably require the explicit contract-defining
form of the preceding section.

Furthermore, many of the multi-contract systems that people want to
build using Compact, such as token exchanges and systems for making
assertions about real-world entities, are better described using pure
contract types as interfaces.  With the current proposal, a contract
can say, "Here is what I require of any contract that wants to
participate in my system," without imposing any inheritance structure
on the contracts.

### Other Ways of Finding Contract Code

The current proposal describes a very limited way to find the
implementation code for the circuits of an contract type.  Several
other ways to find the code were suggested.  Here are a few.

- The application provides a map from contract addresses to filesystem
  paths, saying where to find the code for a given deployed contract.
- The application provides a map from contract type names to filesystem
  paths, saying where to find the code that implements a given type.
- The application provides a URL for an external service that supplies
  one of the preceding mappings.
- Some representation of circuit code is stored in the ledger when a
  contract is deployed, and any contract calling one of those circuits
  uses the ledger-stored code.
  
In fact, it is expected that a later proposal will extend Compact
using something like one of the last two ideas: finding the code for a
contract in some external location, maybe the ledger.  If such an
extension were not on the horizon, one of the other alternatives might
have been included in this proposal, but with the expectation that a
canonical definition for each circuit will soon be available, any
other alternative would only create unnecessarily complicated
infrastructure.


<!--
## References

Link to relevant related work, such as research papers or similar features in
other contexts.
-->

## Acknowledgments

<!--
Acknowledge non-authors who helped with the CoIP.
-->

Many designs for extending Compact to support multi-contract systems
have been discussed, a few of which are described in the Rejected
Ideas section.  All of these were discussed at length (and some
written up as full specifications), with
- Joseph Denman
- Kent Dybvig
- Kevin Millikin

Many thanks to them for their contributions to this proposal and its
predecessors.  Also, Thomas Kerber's *Kachina* system that formed the
foundations of Midnight already made space for multi-contract
interactions, and Jonathan Rossie's original vision for the language
that become Compact included the ability for one contract to call
another.  None of this would exist without their work.

## Copyright

This CoIP is licensed under [Apache 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).

## Footnotes

<!--
If necessary, include footnotes in the CoIP text using GitHub's footnote
syntax[^1].  Keep the footnote heading at the bottom of the document.

[^1]: See the [GitHub Markdown guide](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax#footnotes).
-->

